Nigeria’s energy access presents a paradox. In 2016, the country flared 6.9 billion standard cubic meters (scm) of natural gas (about 9.5 per cent of daily production), translating to between US$700 million and US$1.00 billion during 2014-2016. Moreover, in Nigeria, the daily average of solar radiation is 19.8 MJ/m2 /day 1, which is untapped for solar energy, which the Government projected to be as high as 6,000 MW. The country also has capacity to generate at least 1,100 MW of electricity from biomass and 800 MW from wind by 2030. Yet, less than 60 percent of the population have access to electricity. Irregular energy supply leads to the proliferation of small diesel generators, which are more expensive than renewable energy and lead to noise and air pollution as well as health hazards. UNDP contributes to harnessing untapped biomass and solar resources for energy access in many ways. Regarding biomass, UNDP efforts include supporting forestry management to balance demand for firewood, scaled up improved cookstoves to reduce deforestation in Delta and Kaduna States, and manufacturing efficient cookstoves in Bwari Local Government in Abuja. This partnership motivated the governments to distribute 750,000 clean cook stoves and 18,000 wonderbags in 2014 alone (FGN, 2016). To address ecological problems such as deforestation and desertification, the National Clean Cooking Scheme (NCCS) aims to distribute over 20 millions of clean cook stoves by 2020. Regarding solar energy, UNDP supported the following activities: the preparation of the National Energy Master Plan; the development of off-grid solar-PV for homes, street lighting and health delivery in 12 communities in North Eastern Nigeria and 14 villages in Bwari Local Government in Abuja; the fabrication of solar-powered agro-processing machines for women in Ebonyi, Nassarawa, Benue, Jigawa, Ogun and Kano States; solar electrification in Edo State (Odighi and Ofetebe communities) and in Nasarawa State (Roguwa community). This includes training of youths for installation and maintenance of solar facilities. Opportunities and lessons for transformation abound. These include: providing affordable market-based solutions; de-risking the environment through matching grants; strengthening the participation of value chain market-based actors; hands-on training; adopting to fit local technology and practices; promoting demand-driven initiatives, ensuring that renewable energy initiatives open up businesses for small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); and putting in place exit strategies. There is enormous opportunity for renewable energy in Nigeria due to a population of around 73 million without access to electricity and the abundance of untapped renewable energy resources including surface solar irradiance averaging about 1,700 kWh/m in the northern part of the country. The Government’s SE4ALL Action Agenda aims at developing new biomass energy sources such as pellets, briquettes, biogas and liquid fuels (e.g. ethanol) and create self-sustaining entrepreneurial network of rural micro-entrepreneurs for achieving this. UNDP is ready to accompany the Federal and State Governments and the private sector to achieve these goals. 

Ghana is one of the few African countries with successful stories on electricity access. Between 2000 and 2016, its electricity access rate increased from 45 percent to 84 percent – thanks to the committed implementation of the 1989 National Electrification Scheme and policies focused on rural communities. Ghana has a high electricity access rate of over 80 per cent of the population. In the recent past, however, low water levels caused by droughts and unstable gas supply have led to load shedding. The policy goal is to increase the total installed capacity from 3,200 MW to 5,000 MW, and to increase share of renewable energy from 0.1 now to 10 per cent by 2020 with a view to leveraging the country’s renewable energy potential. This is to be achieved through: 150-300 MW of small and medium hydro power plants; two million solar lanterns; 30,000 solar home systems; 20-26 MW of utility-scale biomass and waste energy capacity; 150-250 MW of utility-scale wind; and 50-150 MW of utility-scale solar capacity. The potential for renewable energy is high. For instance, the country is estimated to have about 2,700 m of biomass, which could generate over 110 megawatts (MW) of power. This source alone could create more than 26,000 direct jobs along the value chain (KNUST, 2015). Despite this robust opportunity, biomass co-generation plants, which use sawmill residue and oil palm waste, have a total capacity of over 6 MW About 13,000 Ghanaians died annually from air pollution mostly due to 71 percent of the population relying on solid biomass for cooking (IEA, 2017). This among others revamped Government interest to accelerate access to improved cooking facilities. The potential for wind and solar is even more. For instance, the average annual wind speed above 50 m is 8 m/s and could be as high as 9.9 m/s in certain locations. The monthly average solar radiation is between 4.4 and 5.6 kWh/m2 /day with sunshine duration between 1,800 and 3,000 hours per year (RVO, 2016). Several companies have started to leverage this potential for investment and business opportunities. UNDP has worked with the Government in many areas to facilitate the achievement of its renewable energy target. The first area is helping to establish the regulatory framework that focuses on standards of efficiency and performance of cook stoves. The second is helping to promote technology transfer including the establishment of the renewable energy centre at the Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology. The third is piloting solar irrigation systems in deprived communities. And finally, UNDP has established the small grants mechanism to promote renewable energy technology transfer. Regulations and standards, and their enforcement continue to be important lessons to be learned. An important opportunity for Ghana is solar energy, especially in the northern part of the country, which has a photovoltaic power potential of up to 1,600 kWh/kWP. The implementation of a rooftop solar programme will be particularly useful. The development of mini-grids – using a tested, optimally affordable business model – would be desirable, particularly for rural dwellers. Fiscal incentives include: exemption from import duties; a feed-in-tariff system; access to a power purchase agreement; and the establishment of a renewable energy fund. 


Electricity in Chad is scarce, expensive and erratic in supply. As of 2012, only 6.4 per cent of
Chadians had access to electricity. The State of Electricity Report 2017 rated Chad as the 18th largest
electricity access deficit globally. The per capita electricity consumption is one of the lowest in the
world and tariffs are among the highest. Yet the photovoltaic power potential ranges from 1,680
to 2,045 kWh/kWp annually from the south to the north. This can play a strong role in bridging the
electricity deficit with solar alone having the potential to generate more than 10 per cent by 2030
(World Bank, 2017). The wind potential in the Central Region, for instance, could reach as high as
7-7.5 m/s. UNDP’s engagement consists in strengthening regulatory frameworks (e.g. helping to
prepare the national strategy on renewable energy, energy coordination), facilitating access (e.g.
distributing cookstoves to 9,500 households) and promoting technology transfer and diffusion (e.g.
at least 25,000 people have learned better techniques for the use and manufacture of solar cookers).
The opportunities for expanding solar energy production are significantly untapped, together with
other renewable energy sources, such as biomass and wind. Enabling policy instruments to partner
with the private sector provides the greatest opportunity to expand renewable energy in Chad. 

Solar lights up new hope for the remote Nyatsato Primary School, Zimbabwe and for health centres in Zambia. Nyatsato Primary School is in Rushinga District, Mashonaland Central, about 240 km away from Harare- few kilometers from Mozambique’s border. The lack of electricity in the school caused hardship for students and teachers alike. The installation of 4.08 kW power systems for lighting two school blocks, powering computer lab, as well as lighting, information sharing and entertainment (e.g. TV and radio) for six teachers houses brought hope in 2015. The school teaching and management staff were trained to be able to use and maintain the equipment. The students use the classrooms at nights to read and have the privilege of being taught computer lessons while teachers complemented their studies using the light to study after school hours. The community has also expressed interest in taking literacy lessons after their children’s lessons are finished. The savings from non-purchase of paraffin and candles because of the solar system is being contemplated for buying communal refrigerator and television. 

 In cooperation with Innovation Norway and four private sector companies, UNDP led a
pilot project to demonstrate how renewable energy improves quality and delivery of healthcare
by installing solar power systems in 13 health facilities and Central Medical Store in Zambia. As a
priority, the solar systems distributed energy to the most critical parts of the hospitals including
emergency rooms, surgery, pharmacies, labs, vaccine refrigerators, and delivery rooms. Maternity
wards received electricity 24 hours, seven days per week; vaccines remained available and cold. A
hybrid battery system, using lead-lithium ion batteries, provides efficient storage, competitive unit
costs, and an eight-year lifespan. The performance and usage of the system can be monitored offsite.
For repairs, a “remote repair” scheme uses phone or Skype to provide technical assistance.
85,000 beneficiaries – half of whom are children or women of child bearing age – received higher
quality, reliable healthcare; the number of consultations increased sharply (by between 80-100%)
as did access to vaccines, which are now stored on-site. Since the health facilities could now be
open and operating during the night, the number of deliveries and emergency services increased
dramatically as well.

Access to energy is critical to Africa’s development and growth. Energy is the sustenance of all economies and an enabler of better welfare; where there is a deficit in supply, this cripples economic growth and destroys livelihoods. Due to the urgent need to rapidly reduce carbon emissions and respond to the highly negative impact of climate change, there is a strong push towards promoting economic diversification and value chain development, accelerating access to energy in remote areas, and addressing the challenge of geographically complex terrain, all of which make expansion of access to renewable energy sources a development imperative.
Access to energy in Africa is too low to meet development objectives. As of 2016, four out of ten people in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) have access to electricity, compared to about nine out of ten globally. Also, 16 of the world’s 20 largest energy-deficit countries in 2016 are in SSA.3 Furthermore, SSA accounts for 57 per cent of the global electricity access deficit, affecting 609 million people. Unless urgent actions are taken, this may increase to 654 million Africans without energy by 2030.
Africa has unique potential to scale up energy access to modernize agriculture; rekindle industrialization; increase jobs; and reduce poverty and reduce exclusion. Due to the geographic landscape of African countries, particularly rural communities, access to the national grid is very difficult and expensive. Cost-effective renewable energy therefore becomes the most effective solution to rural electrification in Africa. This solution unleashes the productive capacity of around two-thirds of the population of many African countries, including South Africa, Nigeria, Ethiopia, Democratic Republic of the Congo and Kenya. For example, the recently signed Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Programme in South Africa is expected to create 61,600 jobs.